Hey Professor,

I've got an ethical question that I'm wondering about, and it occurred to me as I wondered that you may be able to offer some insight if you're available to do so.

My brother does a little bit of reselling for side income, mostly buying things that are damaged-box or returned from Amazon. One of the local vendors that he gets things from is called Falling Prices, in Carmichael. We found out yesterday that Falling prices has a few hundred boxes of face masks that are either have damaged packaging, are expired, or are otherwise unsalable by traditional retailers. The boxes are likely going to be sold for a relatively low price, especially considering current demand for the items. Is purchasing and reselling them for profit ethical?

I completely understand the ethical issues connected with, say, going into Walmart, clearing out their face mask stock, and then using the lack of supply to charge ridiculous prices. To my mind, it's easy to see that that behavior deprives individuals of the opportunity to buy a (for healthy people, dubiously) very important commodity in light of the global pandemic. I'm aware that there are many who would argue that allowing prices to increase without a ceiling is actually the most fair thing to do, because it allows price to signal the current scarcity of face masks resulting in more optimized distribution, but I'm trying to ignore that argument. For the sake of this current situation, I'm taking for granted that purchasing more face masks than you can use and then reselling them at hugely inflated prices is unethical.

What I'm trying to understand is whether or not those same arguments apply to the situation of buying masks that are otherwise unsalable, and then reselling them with their defects clearly labeled. To me, the idea feels unethical, but I can't seem to justify that. Due to the fact that Falling Prices primarily caters to resellers, it is almost a certainty that every mask that they have available will be purchased by someone trying to sell them online for a profit within the first hour of business tomorrow. The dominant strategy seems to me to be 'purchase as many as possible, keep what you'll use, and sell the rest at the market price.' If one particular individual doesn't buy them, others certainly will, and regardless of any single person's decision, they'll end up being sold online. Hypothetically, any individual purchasing as many masks as possible for resale will not result in society having reduced access to masks for individual use. The argument for the Wallmart situation that the behavior deprives others doesn't seem to hold for the Falling Prices situation. Maybe the ethical issue is that the masks are then being resold hugely inflated prices, but then I'd have to ask what a fair price is in this market. Would the ethical choice be to buy them and then sell them for MSRP?

The whole situation feels almost like it has some parallels to the tragedy of the commons. Of course it doesn't seem accurate to think of the supply of face masks as a commons, but if we do, there seem to be some interesting similarities. The optimal strategy for society is for people to only purchase what they will use, but it seems like the most rational strategy for an individual is to purchase as many as possible and sell them at the market rate.

If you don't have time to help me out, I totally understand, but having access to a professional ethicist seemed like too good of an opportunity to pass up.

Thanks,
Joe
